Add Probing Documentation & Best Practices (#283)
lightningdevkit/lightningdevkit.org: docs/probing.md

# Probing and Path Finding

## The Challenge of Routing Payments on the Lightning Network

> The Lightning Development Kit (LDK) provides you with the software tools to run a node on the Lightning Network - a collection of tens of thousands of nodes that, together, enable cheap and private Bitcoin transactions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Lightning Development Kit (LDK) provides you with the software tools to build a node on the Lightning node. The Lightning Network is a collection of tens of thousands of nodes that, together, enable cheap and private Bitcoin transactions. 
```

> The challenge is that your node is just one among tens of thousands. While each node has its own internal representation of the Lightning Network Graph, the information within this graph is incomplete to optimally route payments. This is largely because, when nodes announce new (or updated) channels to the network, they do not specify how the capacity is distributed between the two channel parties, making it difficult to know for certain if a given channel is a viable option when routing payments. To further complicate things, your node may not be entirely certain that a given channel is online when routing a payment, further increasing the risk of payment failure.

Reviewer 2: s/Graph/graph

This presents two fundamental challenges when routing payments on the Lightning Network:
1) **Missing Information**: Nodes may not know if a given channel's liquidity is prohibitively unbalanced.
2) **Path-Finding Optimization**: If multiple payment paths exist, we must decide which path is the best.

> To help address both of the above challenges, LDK provides a ```ProbabilisticScorer``` struct. This structure holds information about our node's current view of the Lightning Network graph, including an estimate of available liquidity within each channel. It also records historical liquidity observations, which are updated each time our node either fails or succeeds at making a payment (or probe). It's important to note that our node can have multiple ```ProbabilisticScorer``` in use simultaneously. Furthermore, this can actually be quite beneficial, as it allows our node to leverage multiple perspectives of the Lightning Network graph, helping to ensure we don't become too reliant on the same paths when exploring potential payment paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To help address both of the above challenges, LDK provides a [```ProbabilisticScorer```](https://docs.rs/lightning/latest/lightning/routing/scoring/struct.ProbabilisticScorer.html) struct. This structure holds information about our node's current view of the Lightning Network graph, including an estimate of available liquidity within each channel. It also records historical liquidity observations, which are updated each time our node either fails or succeeds at making a payment (or probe). It's important to note that our node can have multiple ```ProbabilisticScorer``` in use simultaneously. Furthermore, this can actually be quite beneficial, as it allows our node to leverage multiple perspectives of the Lightning Network graph, helping to ensure we don't become too reliant on the same paths when exploring potential payment paths.
```

> To help address both of the above challenges, LDK provides a ```ProbabilisticScorer``` struct. This structure holds information about our node's current view of the Lightning Network graph, including an estimate of available liquidity within each channel. It also records historical liquidity observations, which are updated each time our node either fails or succeeds at making a payment (or probe). It's important to note that our node can have multiple ```ProbabilisticScorer``` in use simultaneously. Furthermore, this can actually be quite beneficial, as it allows our node to leverage multiple perspectives of the Lightning Network graph, helping to ensure we don't become too reliant on the same paths when exploring potential payment paths.

Reviewer 2: I think we can drop the part about multiple scorers here. It's more an implementation detail of how to configure probing.

2) If the payment fails along the way, we'll get an error informing us *where* (which channel) the payment failed. If this happens, we've now learned which channel does not have the ability to forward a 400,000 sat payment.

If we'd like, we can repeat this process with varying amounts of sats to gain a more precise estimate of each channel's available liquidity for this route. We can then do the same for many other routes, thus building up a robust view of the Lightning Network and, ultimately, empowering us to select the optimal path when routing payments in the future.

Probing best practices are discussed in more detail in  [**Best Practices**](#best-practices), however, for now, it's sufficient to note that LDK will update its view of the graph each time real and test payments either succeed or fail. Successes and failures are communicated to our LDK node via the [ScoreUpdate](https://docs.rs/lightning/latest/lightning/routing/scoring/trait.ScoreUpdate.html) trait. These successes and failures serve as historical data points and influence our node's current estimate of available liquidity for each channel.

> Given that the Lightning Network graph is constantly changing as payments flow throughout the ecosystem, our LDK node must account for the passage of time and assume that channel balances will change even if our node has not probed or otherwise interacted with a channel in a while. To accomplish this, LDK provides ```ProbabilisticScoringDecayParameters```. These parameters configure how each channel’s available liquidity estimates are updated over time. For example, one ```ProbabilisticScoringDecayParameters```configuration is ```liquidity_offset_half_life```. This configuration determines how frequently a channel's upper bound and lower bound available liquidity estimations are updated. For example, after the set time passes (default 6 hours), the channel’s lower bound estimate is cut in half, and the upper bound moves halfway to the channel’s total capacity. For example, if a channel has a 1 million sat capacity, and our node currently estimates its lower bound to be 200,000 sats and an upper bound to be 600,000 sats, then, after ```liquidity_offset_half_life```, it will be updated to 100,000 sats and 800,000 sats. While the ```ProbabilisticScoringDecayParameters``` can be customized, default parameters are provided. You can read more about the ```ProbabilisticScoringDecayParameters``` [here](https://docs.rs/lightning/latest/lightning/routing/scoring/struct.ProbabilisticScoringDecayParameters.html).

Reviewer 2: More of a preference, but consider rw=e-wording the last sentence and linking from the word "docs", for instance, instead of "here".

### Finding the Optimal Path

> The ```ProbabilisticScorer``` assists in finding the optimal path by providing our node with a perspective of the Lightning Network graph and the estimated available liquidity for each channel. To assist in finding the optimal payment route, LDK provides ```ProbabilisticScoringFeeParameters```. These fee parameters impact how our node optimizes its routing decisions. Broadly speaking, ```ProbabilisticScoringFeeParameters``` contains various parameters that help select paths with desirable properties (ex: fewer hops, reliable, private, low fees, etc.). For example, one setting is ```liquidity_penalty_amount_multiplier_msat```. This configuration defines a multiplier that is used in conjunction with the total amount flowing over the given channel and our node's estimated probability of successfully routing the payment through the channel. This configuration will give a larger penalty to channels that have a low probability of success, and that penalty will grow larger as the payment amount increases.

Reviewer 2: For `liquidity_penalty_amount_multiplier_msat`, this was recently changed such that the success probability is based on the total amount but the multiplier is used with the payment amount. See https://github.com/lightningdevkit/rust-lightning/pull/3356.

Similar to the ```ProbabilisticScoringDecayParameters```, ```ProbabilisticScoringFeeParameters``` parameters are customizable, but defaults are provided. You can read more about the ```ProbabilisticScoringFeeParameters``` [here](https://docs.rs/lightning/latest/lightning/routing/scoring/struct.ProbabilisticScoringFeeParameters.html).

## The ```ProbabilisticScorer```

As discussed earlier, the ```ProbabilisticScorer``` (seen below) is responsible for maintaining and updating our node's estimates of available channel liquidity.

A ```ProbabilisticScorer``` has the following fields:
- ```decay_params```: This field holds the decay parameters (```ProbabilisticScoringDecayParameters```) for the scorer. As mentioned above, these are customizable, but LDK also provides defaults. You can learn more about them [here](https://docs.rs/lightning/latest/lightning/routing/scoring/struct.ProbabilisticScoringDecayParameters.html).
- ```network_graph```: This field holds a reference to the network graph.
- ```logger```: This field holds a reference to the logger.

> - ```channel_liquidities```: This field holds a ```HashMap```, which maps **short channel IDs** to ```ChannelLiquidity``` objects. These objects include liquidity estimates, historical data for the respective channels, and timestamps indicating when the liquidity estimates were last updated.

Reviewer 2: Given `channel_liquidities` is part of the internal representation, we probably don't need to mention it , unlike the other fields which are passed as parameters.

Once implemented, the ```ProbabilisticScorer```, along with its parameters (```ProbabilisticScoringDecayParameters``` and ```ProbabilisticScoringFeeParameters```), becomes the backbone of path-finding in LDK. The next section will describe best practices for implementing, training, and serving the ```ProbabilisticScorer``` within your application.

``` rust
pub struct ProbabilisticScorer<G: Deref<Target = NetworkGraph<L>>, L: Deref>
where L::Target: Logger {
	decay_params: ProbabilisticScoringDecayParameters,
	network_graph: G,
	logger: L,
	channel_liquidities: HashMap<u64, ChannelLiquidity>,
}
```

## Best Practices

Before digging into best practices for probing, it's important to note that popular Lightning Network implementations such as Core Lightning (CLN), Lightning Network Daemon (LND), and Lightning Development Kit (LDK), have different internal representations of the Lightning Network. Therefore, it's not possible to simply "feed" CLN, LND, or LDK the same scoring file or information when setting up path-finding functionality.

> ### General Architecture Approaches

Reviewer: @jkczyz does this check out? So probing isn't something we would do on a mobile phone?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, the wallet's vendor would periodically provide an updated scorer for the wallet to use. A mobile wallet would need to be active to send / handle probes. However, a wallet could send a JIT probe before making a payment to help ensure it will make it to the destination. And it could update it's local scorer with recent payment success / failure results, though that information would tend to decay before the next payment, if payments are infrequent.

3) **Probe Large Nodes**: As mentioned above, it can be beneficial to probe large nodes on the network, such as ACINQ. This is because large nodes can often be the final destination for payments, so probing these nodes will help your LDK node understand which paths are viable for varying payment amounts. It's also worth noting that since many channels on the Lightning Network are connected to large nodes, you will likely succeed in probing large nodes via the "Random Probing" approach.
4) **Use Multiple ```ProbabilisticScorer```**: Your node can leverage multiple ```ProbabilisticScorer``` at once. Remember, each scorer has its own internal liquidity estimates and payment history for each channel it knows about. Therefore, it may be beneficial to use a new scorer, which has not been updated, to select a route and then update a different scorer. This approach would help ensure that your node doesn't keep probing the same paths, as your node's updated scorer will likely begin to identify and prefer certain paths once it's sufficiently updated.

> 5) **Varry The Payment Amount**: Remember, a central part of the path-finding algorithm involves generating penalties for each channel so that your node can select the best path. A key variable when calculating the penalty for each channel is the payment amount. You will likely get different paths for the same source --> destination payment, depending on the amount. Therefore, it's important to varry the payment amount when setting up your application to probe the network. You can read more about the ```ProbabilisticScoringFeeParameters``` [here](https://docs.rs/lightning/latest/lightning/routing/scoring/struct.ProbabilisticScoringFeeParameters.html).

Reviewer 2: s/Varry/Vary
(two places)

```rust
fn send_rand_probe(
    channel_manager: &ChannelManager, graph: &NetworkGraph,
    logger: &disk::FilesystemLogger,
    scorer: &RwLock<ProbabilisticScorer<Arc<NetworkGraph>, Arc<disk::FilesystemLogger>>>
) {
    let recipient = {
	// Get read-only lock on graph.
        let read_only_graph = graph.read_only();

	// Check if graph has any nodes we can probe. If none, return.
        if read_only_graph.nodes().is_empty() { 
            return; 
        }
        // Select random node from the graph.
        let mut it = read_only_graph.nodes().unordered_iter().skip(::rand::random::<usize>() % read_only_graph.nodes().len());
        it.next().unwrap().0.clone()
    };
    
    // Generate a random amount for the probe - up to 500,000,000 milli-satoshis.

>     let amt = ::rand::random::<u64>() % 500_000_000;

Reviewer 2: It might be worth noting somewhere how a more advance prober might choose an amount. For instance, it could try to hone in on the exact liquidity balance by choosing an amount that falls between the min and max liquidity estimate of a channel. Probing below / above the the min / max wouldn't yield any useful information. Although, changing the amount could result in a different path being chosen. To chose an exact path, they could use `lightning::routing::router::build_route_from_hops`. https://docs.rs/lightning/latest/lightning/routing/router/fn.build_route_from_hops.html

        &channel_manager.get_our_node_id(),
        &RouteParameters::from_payment_params_and_value(payment_params, amt_msat),
        &graph, Some(&chan_refs), logger, &inflight_scorer, &score_params, &[32; 32]
    );

    match route_res {
	Ok(route) => {
		// Iterate over each path.
		for path in route.paths {
			let _ = channel_manager.send_probe(path);
		}
	},
	Err(e) => {
		println!("Failed to find a route: {:?}", e);
	}
    }
}
```

#### Updating Our Scorer 

LDK leverages an event-driven architecture, allowing for asynchronous result notification. Therefore, to update our scorer over time, we'll want to inform our application that it should be on the lookout for payment or probing-related events, as these are what indicate to our node that a given route has succeeded or failed. The specific events that we should be watching for and handling are ```Event::PaymentPathFailed```, ```Event::PaymentPathSuccessful```, ```Event::ProbeSuccessful```, and ```Event::ProbeFailed```. There are many other event types. For extensive documentation of LDK events, please see [here](https://docs.rs/lightning/latest/lightning/events/enum.Event.html).

> To handle the above events and other tasks that either can or should run in the background, LDK provides the ```process_events_async``` function within the ```lightning-background-processor``` crate. When instantiated, this starts an asynchronous process of handling lightning network node operations, such as maintaining our node's view of the network graph, updating the scorer, and more. 

Reviewer 2: Let's link to the crate docs.

Similar to handling payment and probe-related events, the background processor that we created in the previous section will call ```time_passed``` on our scorer and persist the updated scorer every 5 minutes.

#### Sending Probes

We're almost done! Now that we have probing functionality built out and the ability to update our scorer with the results, we just need to tell our application to send a probe randomly, once per minute. 

Within your application, you will likely have a main entry point where you initialize important LDK components such as the ```ChannelManager```, ```ChainMonitor```, and the ```ProbabilisticScorer``` itself. Since all of the required components will be available within this asynchronous entry point, we can configure our app to send a probe every 60 seconds by calling the functions we previously created and passing in the required components.

```rust
// Regularly probe.
let probing_cm = Arc::clone(&channel_manager);
let probing_graph = Arc::clone(&network_graph);
let probing_logger = Arc::clone(&logger);

> let probing_scorer = Arc::clone(&scorer);

Reviewer 2: We should use a fresh scorer here rather than the same one used for updates, IIUC.
